revisions to command line git (#164)
merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io: rse-cmdline-git.Rmd

where `verb` is what we actually want to do
and `options` is additional optional information which may or may not be required for the `verb`.
Here is how Dracula sets up his new laptop:

```shell
$ git config --global user.name "Vlad Dracula"
$ git config --global user.email "vlad@tran.sylvan.ia"
```

(Please use your own name and email address instead of Dracula's.)

For these lessons we will be interacting with [GitHub](https://github.com/),
so the email address should be the same as the one used when setting up your GitHub account.

The commands we just ran above only need to be run once: the flag `--global` tells Git
to use the settings for every project, in your user account, on this computer.
You can re-run them at any time if you want to change your details.

You can also check your settings at any time:

```shell
$ git config --list
```

> **Git Help and Manual**
>
> Always remember that if you forget a `git` command,
> you can access the list of commands by using `-h` and access the Git manual by using `--help` :
>
> ```shell
> $ git config -h
> $ git config --help
> ```

## Creating a repository {#rse-cmdline-git-repos}

Once Git is configured,

> we can start using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we can start using it. This section will cover how to set up a git repository associate with a project folder. 
```

# Git at the command line {#rse-cmdline-git}

## Questions {#rse-cmdline-git-questions}

```{r, child="questions/rse-cmdline-git.md"}
```

## Introduction {#rse-cmdline-git-intro}

In a previous lesson (TODO: provide link),
we learned the basics of Git using a graphical interface (GitKraken or R Studio).
Like many computer programs,
using Git at the command line is a potentially more powerful option,
as it allows you to access all the features.
This chapter describes how the basic "add, commit, push, pull" cycle works at the command line,
before introducing new concepts including branching and pull requests.

## Setting up Git {#rse-cmdline-git-setup}

When we use Git at the command line for the first time,
we need to configure a few things. 

On a command line, Git commands are written as `git verb options`,
where `verb` is what we actually want to do
and `options` is additional optional information which may or may not be required for the `verb`.

> Here is how Dracula sets up his new laptop:

Reviewer 2: Is this "Dracula" person used throughout this course? Maybe change to your actual name?

```shell
$ git config --global user.name "Vlad Dracula"
$ git config --global user.email "vlad@tran.sylvan.ia"
```

(Please use your own name and email address instead of Dracula's.)

For these lessons we will be interacting with [GitHub](https://github.com/),
so the email address should be the same as the one used when setting up your GitHub account.

The commands we just ran above only need to be run once: the flag `--global` tells Git
to use the settings for every project, in your user account, on this computer.
You can re-run them at any time if you want to change your details.

You can also check your settings at any time:

```shell
$ git config --list
```

> **Git Help and Manual**
>
> Always remember that if you forget a `git` command,
> you can access the list of commands by using `-h` and access the Git manual by using `--help` :
>
> ```shell
> $ git config -h
> $ git config --help
> ```

## Creating a repository {#rse-cmdline-git-repos}

Once Git is configured,
we can start using it.

> We will continue with the story of Wolfman and Dracula who are investigating if it

Reviewer 2: Do we want to stick to a narrative that aligns with the general outcome of using Git for a software package? Rather than Wolfman and Dracula and the lander?

Reviewer 2: This applies to all the below text too, including "mkdir planets" etc. I think it would be better to be aligned with our goal of using Git for making software packages.

is possible to send a planetary lander to Mars. 

*TODO: Figure - Motivating Example [../fig/motivatingexample.png](https://github.com/swcarpentry/git-novice/blob/gh-pages/fig/motivatingexample.png)*

First, let's create a directory in `Desktop` folder for our work and then move into that directory:

```shell
$ cd ~/Desktop
$ mkdir planets
$ cd planets
```

Then we tell Git to make `planets` a repository — a place where Git can store versions of our files:

```shell
$ git init
```

> It is important to note that `git init` will create a repository that

Reviewer 2: I feel that the learners should already know this stuff and that it will be covered in the novice section. I think we could cut this part up to the "git status"

Reviewer 2: Though, I guess it could be kept, especially if in the novice we focus on the GUI interaction with Git while this is the commandline.

Reviewer: Maybe add a bit near the beginning of this section along the lines of: 
"This section covers how to generate a git repository, associated with a project folder. If you already know how to do this at the command line, skip to the next section." 

I think we should have a "topic sentence" regardless, so I'll suggest that above.

includes subdirectories and their files---there is no need to create
separate repositories nested within the `planets` repository,
whether subdirectories are present from the beginning or added later.
Also, note that the creation of the `planets` directory and its initialization as a
repository are completely separate processes.

If we use `ls` to show the directory's contents,
it appears that nothing has changed:

```shell
$ ls
```

But if we add the `-a` flag to show everything,
we can see that Git has created a hidden directory within `planets` called `.git`:

```shell
$ ls -a
```

```text
.	..	.git
```

Git uses this special sub-directory to store all the information about the project, 
including all files and sub-directories located within the project's directory.

> If we ever delete the `.git` sub-directory,

Reviewer 2: This part here could be used as a "call out/reminder" to just say, "hey, the whole history is in the .git folder"

  (use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)

	modified:   mars.txt

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
```

Whoops:
Git won't commit because we didn't use `git add` first.
Let's fix that:

```shell
$ git add mars.txt
$ git commit -m "Add concerns about effects of Mars' moons on Wolfman"
```

```text
[master 34961b1] Add concerns about effects of Mars' moons on Wolfman
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
```

> **Ignoring things**
>
> We're only working with one file so far (`mars.txt`),
> but what if we had lots of files in this directory?
> We might want to have git track our text (`.txt`) files, for instance,
> but not our data files (`.dat`).
>
> So that those data files don't show up as "untracked files" every time we call `git status`,
> we can create a file in the root directory of our project called `.gitignore`.
> In this file we can list all the files we want git to ignore.
> For example, we could add the line `*.dat` to `.gitignore` to ignore all the data files.
> 
> Don't forget to add and commit the `.gitignore` file to your repository so that git
> knows to use it!

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe have an exercise at this point?

## Remotes in GitHub {#rse-cmdline-git-remotes}

One of the first things we did when learning Git via GitKraken or R Studio
was to link our local repository with an external hosting service (GitHub).
We will do that again here,
so login to GitHub and create a new repository called `planets`.

> The next step is to connect the two repositories.

Reviewer 2: This is a perfect chance for them to make the repo for the package, so later things like CI and unit testing can build off of this section of the course.

preserved in the `pythondev` branch.

Now we can repeat the process for our bash script in a branch called
`bashdev`.

First we must checkout the `master` branch again. New branches will
include the entire history up to the current commit, and we'd like
to keep these two tasks separate.

```shell
$ git checkout master
$ git branch
```

```text
* master
  pythondev
```

This time let's create and switch two the `bashdev` branch
in one command.

We can do so by adding the `-b` flag to checkout.

```shell
$ git checkout -b bashdev
$ git branch
```

```text
* bashdev
  master
  pythonndev
```

We can use `ls` and `git log` to see that this branch is 
the same as our current `master` branch.

Now we can make `analysis.sh` and add and commit it.
Again imagine instead of `touch`ing the file we worked 
on it for many hours.

```shell
$ touch analysis.sh
$ git add analysis.sh
$ git commit –m “Wrote and tested bash analysis script”
```

```text
[bashdev 2n779ds] Wrote and tested bash analysis script
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
 create mode 100644 analysis.sh
```

Lets check our work again before we switch back to the master branch.

```shell
$ ls
$ git log --oneline
```

> So it turns out the python `analysis.py` is much faster than `analysis.sh`.

Author: I wouldn't sweat the details here. This `analysis.py` vs `analysis.sh` example from the UW Madison branching lesson will be switched out for an example relevant to the package we'll be developing in subsequent drafts.

2.  `git pull origin master` to make sure that
    your starting point is up to date
    (i.e., that the changes you committed while working on the cluster yesterday are now in your local copy,
    or that the fix your colleague did last week has been incorporated).

3.  <code>git checkout -b <em>name-of-feature</em></code> to create a new branch.
    The branch's name should be as descriptive as the name of a function
    or of a file containing source code:
    `"stuff"` or `"fixes"` saves you a couple of seconds of typing when you create the branch,
    and will cost you much more time than that later on
    when you're juggling half a dozen branches
    and trying to figure out what's in each.

4.  Do the work you want to do.
    If some other task occurs to you while you're doing it---for example,
    if you're writing a new function and realize that the documentation for some other function should be updated---*don't*
    do that work in this branch just because you happen to be there.
    Instead,
    commit your changes,
    switch back to `master`,
    create a new branch for the other work,
    and carry on.

5.  Periodically,

>     you may <code>git push origin <em>name-of-feature</em></code> to save your work to GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    you may `git push origin name-of-feature` to save your work to GitHub.
```

6.  When the work is done,
    you `git pull origin master` to get any changes that anyone else has put in the master copy
    into your branch
    and merge any conflicts.
    This is an important step:
    you want to do the merge *and test that everything still works* in *your* branch,
    not in `master`.

7.  Finally,
    use `git checkout master` to switch back to the `master` branch on your machine

>     and <code>git merge <em>name-of-feature</em> master</code> to merge your changes into `master`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    and `git merge name-of-feature master` to merge your changes into `master`.
```

> # Git at the command line {#cmdline-git}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Git at the command line {#rse-cmdline-git}
```

This should be done throughout.

## Questions {#cmdline-git-questions}

```{r, child="questions/cmdline-git.md"}
```

## Objectives {#cmdline-git-objectives}

```{r, child="objectives/cmdline-git.md"}
```

## Introduction {#cmdline-git-intro}

> A version control system stores a master copy of your code in a repository,

Reviewer 2: Define "repository". These could be clarified depending on the target skill level, but I know most novices don't understand what the word "repository" means in the context of version control.

which you can’t edit directly.

> Instead, you checkout a working copy of the code,

Reviewer 2: Define "checkout".

> edit that code, then commit changes back to the repository.

Reviewer 2: Define "commit". Could add these to the glossary.

What's the target audience here? Beginner or intermediate?

In this way, the system records a complete revision history (i.e. of every commit),
so that you can retrieve and compare previous versions at any time.
This is useful from an individual viewpoint,
because you don’t need to store multiple (but slightly different) copies of the same script.

TODO: Figure - [PhD Comics, A Story Told in File Names](http://phdcomics.com/comics.php?f=1323) 

It’s also useful from a collaboration viewpoint,
because the system keeps a record of who made what changes when
and prevents people from overwriting other people's work.

In a previous lesson (TODO: provide link),
we learned the basics of a version control system called Git

> via a popular graphical user interface called GitKraken.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to include this line, or at least simply mention "via a graphical user interface", since the R version would use RStudio.

Author: Good point. Thanks.

Such interfaces are a relatively new development - originally

> Git could only be used at the command line.

Reviewer 2: Not sure this is important, as this comment will quickly become outdated (GUI have existed for Git almost since it began, if very primitive).

GitKraken and other similar products simplify
the command line experience by allowing users to point and click
(which is great for teaching and learning),
but the tradeoff is that users aren't able to access the full functionality of Git.
Graphical interfaces also often cost money to use,
and aren't always installed on remote computing facilities (e.g. supercomputing or cloud facilities).
Long story short,
while products like GitKraken are a good version control solution for many people,
due to issues of functionality, cost, accessibility and/or personal preference,

> others may need or want to use Git via the command line.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph could probably be reduced to "like many computer programs, using Git directly through the terminal is much more powerful than using it through GUI and allows you to access all the features of Git" or something along those lines.

Author: Good suggestion - I was struggling with that paragraph.

This chapter describes how to do just that.

## Setting up Git {#cmdline-git-setup}

When we use Git on a new computer for the first time,
we need to configure a few things. Below are a few examples
of configurations we will set as we get started with Git:

*   our name and email address,
*   what our preferred text editor is,
*   and that we want to use these settings globally (i.e. for every project).

On a command line, Git commands are written as `git verb options`,

> where `verb` is what we actually want to do and `options` is additional optional information which may be needed for the `verb`. So here is how

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where `verb` is what we actually want to do and `options` is additional information which may or may not be required for the `verb`. Here is how
```

| Sublime Text (Mac) | `$ git config --global core.editor "/Applications/Sublime\ Text.app/Contents/SharedSupport/bin/subl -n -w"` |
| Sublime Text (Win, 32-bit install) | `$ git config --global core.editor "'c:/program files (x86)/sublime text 3/sublime_text.exe' -w"` |
| Sublime Text (Win, 64-bit install) | `$ git config --global core.editor "'c:/program files/sublime text 3/sublime_text.exe' -w"` |
| Notepad++ (Win, 32-bit install)    | `$ git config --global core.editor "'c:/program files (x86)/Notepad++/notepad++.exe' -multiInst -notabbar -nosession -noPlugin"`|
| Notepad++ (Win, 64-bit install)    | `$ git config --global core.editor "'c:/program files/Notepad++/notepad++.exe' -multiInst -notabbar -nosession -noPlugin"`|
| Kate (Linux)       | `$ git config --global core.editor "kate"`       |
| Gedit (Linux)      | `$ git config --global core.editor "gedit --wait --new-window"`   |
| Scratch (Linux)       | `$ git config --global core.editor "scratch-text-editor"`  |
| Emacs              | `$ git config --global core.editor "emacs"`   |
| Vim                | `$ git config --global core.editor "vim"`   |

> | VS Code                | `$ git config --global core.editor "code --wait"`   |

Reviewer 2: I feel this is too much for a course. Could we decide on one and refer anyone else to this list rather than post it in the material?

It is possible to reconfigure the text editor for Git whenever you want to change it.

> **Exiting Vim**
>
> Note that Vim is the default editor for many programs.
> If you haven't used Vim before and wish to exit a session
> without saving your changes, press <kbd>Esc</kbd> then type `:q!` and hit <kbd>Return</kbd>.
> If you want to save your changes and quit, press <kbd>Esc</kbd> then type `:wq` and hit <kbd>Return</kbd>.

> The four commands we just ran above only need to be run once: the flag `--global` tells Git

Reviewer 2: Which four commands? The two user name and email commands were shown and a ton of other commands. This needs to be more explicit about which commands are being referred to.

to use the settings for every project, in your user account, on this computer.

You can check your settings at any time:

```shell
$ git config --list
```

You can change your configuration as many times as you want: use the
same commands to choose another editor or update your email address.

> > **Proxy**

Reviewer 2: How much do we want to add "side material" in the main text of the course material? And also, if this course is targeted to novices, this will be confusing (proxies confuse me too).

to use the settings for every project, in your user account, on this computer.

You can check your settings at any time:

```shell
$ git config --list
```

You can change your configuration as many times as you want: use the
same commands to choose another editor or update your email address.

> **Proxy**
>
> In some networks you need to use a
> [proxy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proxy_server). If this is the case, you
> may also need to tell Git about the proxy:
>
> ```shell
> $ git config --global http.proxy proxy-url
> $ git config --global https.proxy proxy-url
> ```
>
> To disable the proxy, use
>
> ```shell
> $ git config --global --unset http.proxy
> $ git config --global --unset https.proxy
> ```

> **Git Help and Manual**
>
> Always remember that if you forget a `git` command,
> you can access the list of commands by using `-h` and access the Git manual by using `--help` :
>
> ```shell
> $ git config -h
> $ git config --help
> ```

## Creating a repository {#rse-cmdline-git-repos}

Once Git is configured,
we can start using it.

We will continue with the story of Wolfman and Dracula who are investigating if it

> is possible to send a planetary lander to Mars. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is possible to send a planetary lander to Mars. We will create a folder for their notes and make it into 
a Git repository so we can track changes to the files. 
```

separate repositories nested within the `planets` repository,
whether subdirectories are present from the beginning or added later.
Also, note that the creation of the `planets` directory and its initialization as a
repository are completely separate processes.

If we use `ls` to show the directory's contents,
it appears that nothing has changed:

```shell
$ ls
```

But if we add the `-a` flag to show everything,
we can see that Git has created a hidden directory within `planets` called `.git`:

```shell
$ ls -a
```

```text
.	..	.git
```

Git uses this special sub-directory to store all the information about the project, 
including all files and sub-directories located within the project's directory.
If we ever delete the `.git` sub-directory,
we will lose the project's history.

We can check that everything is set up correctly
by asking Git to tell us the status of our project:

```shell
$ git status
```

```text
# On branch master
#
# Initial commit
#
nothing to commit (create/copy files and use "git add" to track)
```

If you are using a different version of `git`, the exact
wording of the output might be slightly different.

## Tracking changes {#rse-cmdline-git-changes}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have a folder and repository for our work, we'll want to add files to it and track those changes using Git.
```

>    in otherwise empty directories. Unlike `.gitignore`, these files are not special
>    and their sole purpose is to populate a directory so that Git adds it to
>    the repository. In fact, you can name such files anything you like.
>
> 2. If you create a directory in your Git repository and populate it with files,
>    you can add all files in the directory at once by:
>
>    ```shell
>    git add <directory-with-files>
>    ```
>
>    Try it for yourself:
>
>    ```shell
>    $ touch spaceships/apollo-11 spaceships/sputnik-1
>    $ git status
>    $ git add spaceships
>    $ git status
>    ```
>
>    Before moving on, we will commit these changes.
>
>    ```shell
>    $ git commit -m "Add some initial thoughts on spaceships"
>    ```

To recap, when we want to add changes to our repository,
we first need to add the changed files to the staging area
(`git add`) and then commit the staged changes to the
repository (`git commit`):

*TODO: Figure - The Git Commit Workflow [../fig/git-committing.svg](https://github.com/swcarpentry/git-novice/blob/gh-pages/fig/git-committing.svg)*

## Exploring history {#rse-cmdline-git-history}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we've built up a history of changes, we have the ability to look at previous versions of files, and, if desired, restore a specific file to a previous state. To do this, we need to be able to indicate which version of the file 
we want to examine or use and how to find that identifier. 
```

Instead,
do all the work required for a feature,
rebase,
and then merge in recent changes from `master` and merge back to `master`:

FIXME: figure

What if you have pushed a branch to GitHub (or elsewhere)
and then combine the commits to change its history
as shown below:

FIXME: figure

<!-- == noindent -->
In this case,
Git realizes that your merge would lose information and prevents the operation from going through.
You can use `git push --force` to overwrite the remote history,
but this is usually a sign that you should have done something differently a while back.
Remember,
`git push --force` will also overwrite any work that other people have pushed to the repository,
so it's a good way to end friendships.

### What *is* a feature?

But what is a "feature", exactly?
What's large enough to merit creation of a new branch?
These rules make sense for small projects with or without collaborators:

1.  Anything cosmetic that is only one or two lines long can be done in `master` and committed right away.
    "Cosmetic" means changes to comments or documentation:
    nothing that affects how code runs---not even a simple variable renaming---is done this way,

>     because experience has taught that things that aren't supposed to often do.

Reviewer: this last sentence is clever but confusing.

	a.dat
	b.dat
	c.dat
	results/

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

Putting these files under version control would be a waste of disk space.
What's worse,
having them all listed could distract us from changes that actually matter,
so let's tell Git to ignore them.

We do this by creating a file in the root directory of our project called `.gitignore`:

```shell
$ nano .gitignore
$ cat .gitignore
```

```text
*.dat
results/
```

These patterns tell Git to ignore any file whose name ends in `.dat`
and everything in the `results` directory.
(If any of these files were already being tracked,
Git would continue to track them.)

Once we have created this file,
the output of `git status` is much cleaner:

```shell
$ git status
```

```text
On branch master
Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)

	.gitignore

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

The only thing Git notices now is the newly-created `.gitignore` file.
You might think we wouldn't want to track it,
but everyone we're sharing our repository with will probably want to ignore

> the same things that we're ignoring.

Reviewer: and it's good to know what we're ignoring, in case we want to change it later!

> that the `git pull` command can be used without any arguments. To do this,
> simply use `git push -u origin master` once the remote has been set up.

We can pull changes from the remote repository to the local one as well:

```shell
$ git pull origin master
```

```text
From https://github.com/vlad/planets
 * branch            master     -> FETCH_HEAD
Already up-to-date.
```

Pulling has no effect in this case because the two repositories are already
synchronized.  If someone else had pushed some changes to the repository on
GitHub, though, this command would download them to our local repository.

> **Uploading files directly in GitHub browser**
>
> Github also allows you to skip the command line and upload files directly to 
> your repository without having to leave the broswer. There are two options. 
> First you can click the "Upload files" button in the toolbar at the top of the
> file tree. Or, you can drag and drop files from your desktop onto the file 
> tree. You can read more about this [on this GitHub page](https://help.github.com/articles/adding-a-file-to-a-repository/)

## Collaborating {#rse-cmdline-git-collaborating}

> 

Reviewer: I wonder if this should be changed to a "collaborating with self" workflow because in real life it's pretty rare for multiple people to have push access to the same repo.
